Welcome to this code challenge on path lengths and transformer adjustments.
I think that this code challenge is a really nice integration of several concepts from earlier in the
course, including calculating path length from the previous video, and also concepts about how the
attention and MLP subblocks contribute to the output of each transformer block, which we measure through
the hidden states.
Exercise one involves just setting things up for the rest of the code challenge.
So import GPT two large.
Remember that this one.
This model version has 36 transformer blocks, and it also has an embedding dimension of 1280.
Now, unlike in the previous video, We are not going to worry about replicating the findings here in
other models, although of course that would be a fantastic extension if you want to do that on your
own.
What I want you to do here is implant hooks into the outputs of the attention and MLP subblocks in the
OpenAI model terminology that corresponds to these C proj layers here.
So there's a C proj for attention and a C proj for MLP.
And remember that these are the outputs of the attention and MLP transformations.
After all of the internal calculations for the adjustments have been made.
But before they actually get added back onto the residual stream.
And that means that these vectors that you get from C proj are not the token embeddings vectors themselves,
but instead are the adjustments to the token embeddings vectors that are passing along the residual
stream.
Anyway, once you create an implant those hooks, then you can paste in and tokenize the Nietzsche text
that I used in the previous video.
And then you can do a forward pass through the model to get the activations from the hooks.
And you also want to get the hidden states outputs.
Finally, you can have a look through the activations in terms of the names of the activations from
the hooks and also the sizes of the activation matrices.
This is just to make sure that these sizes are consistent with what you expect.
And also, yeah, this will just help you make sure you don't have any coding bugs or anything that
would prevent you from accessing and analyzing the Using the data in later exercises.
So now is your opportunity to pause the video, copy, paste, modify code, and solve exercise one.
I will now switch to code, but only fairly briefly just to show the updated code.
In a later exercise in exercise four, we will use the Pearson R correlation function from the Scipy.stats
library, and we will also use the FDR correction function from Statsmodels.
This will be used to correct for multiple comparisons.
Anyway, I will get back to these two functions later.
So otherwise these libraries you've seen before.
Here I'm importing GPT two large.
Here I'm defining and then implanting the hooks for attention.
Proj and MLP proj.
You can see I'm attaching those to the C proj layers.
So again this is not the qkv matrices and the softmax and so on.
This is the final output of the attention subblock.
But before it gets added back onto the residual stream.
And same thing for the MLP layer.
This is not the expansion and then contraction.
This is what happens after the MLP calculations are finished.
And we are yeah this is the adjustment to the embeddings vectors.
Okay.
So uh run that code.
Here is the text literally copy pasted from the previous video.
And we're getting the output uh, hidden states here.
Okay.
And then yeah, this is just, uh, confirming some of the sizes.
So there's 342 tokens, I think.
Yeah.
Uh, one stream of text.
So batch size of one and 180 embeddings dimensions in this model.
Now for some analyses, the goal of exercise two is to calculate and visualize the cosine similarities
between the attention and MLP adjustments.
Now we're not doing any path lengths or angles or anything like that just yet.
Here in this exercise, we just want to make a basic assessment of how the attention and the MLP adjustments
are related to each other per token.
So loop over all of the tokens in the text and over all of the layers the transformer blocks.
And then for each token get the attention and MLP token vector adjustments.
So that means that for each token and each layer, that's going to give you one vector for each of the
transformer block subparts, and each of those vectors is 1280 elements long.
Of course, that corresponds to the embeddings dimensionality.
Then you can calculate the cosine similarity between the attention and MLP adjustments vectors.
You can plot those results in two ways as I'm showing here.
So let me first describe this plot on the left.
The x axis here is the transformer layer.
The y axis is cosine similarity between the attention and MLP adjustments vectors.
And this little gray box over here is the average of the cosine similarities over all of the 342 tokens.
Because we have so many tokens to average over.
You can also calculate the standard deviation of the cosine similarities over that set over all the
tokens.
And that's what these vertical lines here correspond to.
So this is an error bar.
That's the function that you use in Python.
This is for one layer.
And then you just show these error bar plots for all of the layers.
You can already see from the y axis ticks that there's going to be more positive than negative cosine
similarities.
But it will be interesting to see whether they are consistently large and positive.
Maybe they go down to zero or you know, some other pattern could happen.
Now, the way to interpret this cosine similarity here is that if the cosine similarity is really high,
then the attention and the MLP adjustment vectors are really similar across the tokens.
In fact, if the cosine similarity were exactly one, then that would mean that the two subcomponents
of the transformer block are entirely redundant because the attention and MLP layers will be adding
exactly the same information back onto the original token embeddings vector.
So we certainly don't expect the correlation to be one, and you don't even, you know, it's obvious
from this plot here as well.
But the question is what do what does the range of these cosine similarities look like empirically in
this text?
Okay, so that's for the left plot.
Over here on the right, I have the histogram of all of the cosine similarity values over all the tokens
and all the layers.
So that's going to be 342 times 36 numbers.
And here is the histogram of all of those numbers.
So that's for exercise two.
I hope you enjoy working through this exercise.
You should now pause the video and get to work.
And now I will switch to code, show my solution, and interpret the findings.
Here I'm looping over all of the layers.
Here I'm looping over all of the tokens in the text.
Now, I suppose what I probably could be doing is ignoring the first token based on just claims I've
made several times in this course.
And what you will see in a couple of exercises from now that the first token is weird and not typical
of all the other tokens.
But anyway, this is.
Yeah, this is just how I wrote the code.
Okay, so loop over all the tokens.
Here I am extracting the activations for attention and MLP from this layer and this token.
And then I am calculating the cosine similarity between them.
Now at various points in this course, I've calculated cosine similarity manually by directly implementing
the formula.
Sometimes I use the scikit learn implementation.
Here I'm using the PyTorch implementation.
If you do not have multi-dimensional tensors then this is going to crash.
So if you try to do something like this, then these variables here, I can even run this code here.
This is going to crash over here.
And the problem is that PyTorch is expecting these to be multi-dimensional tensors.
But they're actually just single vectors here.
So that's really easy to solve.
You can just unsqueeze it or basically add more dimensions to these vectors and then it's going to work
okay.
If you solve this by writing out the cosine similarity formula manually.
Fantastic.
That's really great.
Okay here I'm showing the error bars.
So these are the x values just indices going up to the number of layers.
Here are the cosine similarities I'm averaging over x is one, which is the token.
So it's going to be the average over all of the tokens for each layer.
And then the standard deviation.
Okay.
And then uh let's see over here in the right plot I'm just showing the histogram.
I'm basically just flattening out all of this matrix just to get all of those values in here.
And here's what it looks like.
So we see that the cosine similarity between the attention and the MLP sublayers is basically zero for
most of the transformer block.
Now I haven't done any statistical analyses here.
If you would like to, uh, do that, that's great.
But I haven't done that here.
So I can only make qualitative interpretations.
But it certainly is the case that, uh, except for the very beginning and the very end, Most of the
adjustments that are calculated by the attention and the MLP subblocks are uncorrelated.
They are orthogonal to each other, and that is actually pretty sensible.
It means that the calculations engaged by the attention mechanism and the calculations engaged by the
MLP sublayer are different from each other.
And we also see that in the histogram over here.
So most of the values are clustered around zero cosine similarity.
And then we have this little shoulder up here.
And that corresponds to the beginning and the end.
I hope you are enjoying this code challenge so far.
We're about halfway through the code challenge.
There's another several exercises to go, so I recommend getting up from your chair.
Splash some water in your face.
Same thing that I'd say every time I cut these videos.
Anyway, let's continue in the next video.